content/modules/ROOT/pages/index.adoc, before:

= Lab Introduction

== About this Lab

Already know the basics of Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform and want more?

Note: In Ansible Automation Platform 2.5, Automation Controller is now accessible through the automation execution interface in the new UI, providing the same capabilities.
If you're familiar with previous versions of AAP, note that from now on, we will refer to Automation Controller as automation execution to align with the latest terminology.

In this hands-on lab, we'll introduce you to some advanced capabilities of automation execution so can benefit even more from using Ansible Automation Platform (often abbreviated as AAP).
You'll learn how to:

* Configure automation execution resources with Ansible
* Employ automation execution workflows so teams can collaborate more efficiently.
* Use surveys and the revamped RBAC system to give your users self-service access.
* Use dynamic inventories to scale your automation.
* Get more flexibility with the constructed inventory feature.
* Secure the automation supply chain with content signing that ensures only approved content runs in automation execution.

NOTE: This lab is ideal for anyone with basic Ansible Automation Platform experience looking to expand their automation skills.


== Lab Infrastructure

Your lab includes a number of servers:

- A bastion host running VS Code server and Gitea server.
  You'll also use the command line there to do some Ansible development.
- A one-node AAP cluster.
- Two managed RHEL 9 hosts.

[TIP]
====
. All access information has been summarized for your convenience on page link:lab-access.html[Lab Access],
. This page and all others are accessible from the upper left corner image:corner_menu.png[role=half-width]
====

== Working the Lab

Some hints to get you started:

- Don’t type everything manually, use copy & paste from the browser when appropriate, but take your time to understand what you are actually doing.
- To **edit files** or **open a terminal window**, we provide **VS Code Server**, basically the great VS Code Editor running in your browser.

TIP: Commands you are supposed to run can be shown with or without the expected output

TIP: The command line can wrap on the HTML page from time to time. Therefore the output might be separated from the command line for better readability by an empty line.

== Finding your way in the lab

If you're reading these lines, you should see a WebUI looking like the following screenshot.
We call this user interface "Showroom" so don't wonder if you see this name here and there.

.Showroom navigation overview
image::showroom.drawio.png[Showroom navigation overview]

The lab instructions are made of sections, or exercises, which you should do in order, not forgetting steps as they might be relevant to following exercises.

You can jump back to a specific section using the list in the top left corner.
Each section has a title and a table of content, followed by instructions, on the left side.

On the right side, there are different tabs each offering a different access to your environment, described in more details in the next chapter.
You may use the resizing handle in the middle to give more space to the environment or to the instructions.

TIP: if you don't see the right hand tabs in your environment, don't worry, you can also access the environment directly, as explained in the next chapter.

== Accessing your Lab Environment

As hinted in the previous chapter, you can access most elements of the environment through the showroom tabs.
In doubt, check the xref:lab-access.adoc[Lab Access] section.

The following chapters explain in more details how to access the command line.

=== Using VS Code

Your main point of contact with the lab is **VS Code Server**, providing a VS Code-experience in your browser. You'll use VS Code to open terminals and to edit files (either in the build-in GUI editor or just using your favorite editor on the command line).

Now, open **VS Code** by clicking on the URL {z_vscode_web_ui_url}[window=_blank], or click on the "Codeserver" tab (which should be the default).

You should be greeted with a login screen:

image::vscode-pwd.png[500,300]

Use the password **{z_vscode_web_ui_password}** to log in to the **VS Code** server web UI. Now open a new terminal by heading to the menu item **Terminal** at the top of the page and select **New Terminal**. A new section will appear in the lower half of the screen and you will be greeted with a prompt:

image::vscode-terminal.png[]

Congrats, you now have a shell terminal on your bastion node you can use to work on the command line. From here you run commands or access the other hosts in your lab environment, if the lab task requires it.

=== OPTIONAL: Direct Lab Access using SSH

You can of course use SSH directly to access the bastion node when you have an SSH client ready to go and know your way around:

[subs="attributes",source,shell,role=execute]
----
ssh {z_ssh_user}@{z_bastion_host_name}
----

The password is still the same: {z_ansible_controller_admin_password}

TIP: The user to access the terminal is `{z_ssh_user}`, but your bastion node is setup to let you become `root` using _sudo_ without a password.

TIP: All access information has been summarized for your convenience under xref:lab-access.adoc[Lab Access], accessible in the navigation menu to the right.

The "Terminal" tab gives you the same impression as SSH without the need to login, you're directly on the bastion host.

== Lab Configuration

Most prerequisite tasks have already been done for you:

- Ansible software is installed
- `sudo` has been configured on the managed hosts to run commands that require root privileges.
- An `.ansible-navigator.yml` configuration file has been created.
Without it, you would have to add parameters to each execution of `ansible-navigator`.

== Brief Introduction to `ansible-navigator`

During this lab, you will always use `ansible-navigator` which supersedes the capabilities of `ansible-playbook`. Let's check Ansible Navigator has been installed correctly (your browser might ask for permission for pasting):

[source,shell,role=execute]
----
ansible-navigator --version
----

where the result should be something like (your actual version might differ):
[source,shell]
----
ansible-navigator 3.4.1
----

Have now a look at your Ansible Navigator configuration file. It's a dot file in your user's home directory and can be printed to screen with the following command:

[source,shell,role=execute]
----
cat ~/.ansible-navigator.yml
----

You can also open the file in VS Code by using the navigation bar on the left or the "Open File" command from the "File" menu.

Note the following parameters within the `execution-environment` section:

- `image`: where the default execution environment is set, we have switched it to your **private automation hub**
- `pull.policy`: set to **missing**, only download the execution environment if it doesn't already exist locally.
- `environment-variables`: since execution environments are basically Linux containers, which don't have access to your environment variables, we have to compile a list of variables we want to have passed through to the container, or even specifically defined.

For a full listing of every configurable knob checkout the link:https://ansible.readthedocs.io/projects/navigator/settings/[settings documentation,window=_blank].

NOTE: For your convenience, we have pre-configured the authentication credentials for Ansible Automation Platform, so you won’t need to log in manually. However, in real-world scenarios, it's best to avoid this practice, as storing passwords in a plaintext configuration file can pose security risks.

Run the `ansible-navigator` command with the `images` argument to look at execution environments configured on the control node:

[source,shell,role=execute]
----
ansible-navigator images
----

image::navigator-images.png[]

NOTE: The output you see might differ from the above output, but you should see at least the one image configured in the file.

This command gives you information about all currently installed Execution Environments or EEs for short. Investigate an EE by pressing the corresponding number. For example pressing **0** with the above example will open the `ee-supported-rhel8` execution environment:

image::navigator-ee-menu.png[]

Selecting **2** for `Ansible version and collections` will show us all Ansible Collections installed on that particular EE, and the version of `ansible-core`:

image::navigator-ee-collections.png[]

To get back to the preceding view in `ansible-navigator` press **Esc**, if needed several times.
The last press in the main menu will get you out of Navigator.
Alternatively you can type **:q** anywhere to exit at once (familiar with Vi?).

Commit message:

reword first chapter, change navigator example

content/modules/ROOT/pages/index.adoc, after:

= Lab Introduction

== About this Lab

Already know the basics of Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform and want more?

Note: In Ansible Automation Platform 2.5, Automation Controller is now accessible through the automation execution interface in the new UI, providing the same capabilities.
If you're familiar with previous versions of AAP, note that from now on, we will refer to Automation Controller as automation execution to align with the latest terminology.

In this hands-on lab, we'll introduce you to some advanced capabilities of automation execution so can benefit even more from using Ansible Automation Platform (often abbreviated as AAP).
You'll learn how to:

* Configure automation execution resources with Ansible
* Employ automation execution workflows so teams can collaborate more efficiently.
* Use surveys and the revamped RBAC system to give your users self-service access.
* Use dynamic inventories to scale your automation.
* Get more flexibility with the constructed inventory feature.
* Secure the automation supply chain with content signing that ensures only approved content runs in automation execution.

NOTE: This lab is ideal for anyone with basic Ansible Automation Platform experience looking to expand their automation skills.


== Lab Infrastructure

Your lab includes a number of servers:

- A bastion host running VS Code server and Gitea server.
  You'll also use the command line there to do some Ansible development.
- A one-node AAP cluster.
- Two managed RHEL 9 hosts.

[TIP]
====
. All access information has been summarized for your convenience on page link:lab-access.html[Lab Access],
. This page and all others are accessible from the upper left corner image:corner_menu.png[role=half-width]
====

== Working the Lab

Some hints to get you started:

- Don’t type everything manually, use copy & paste from the browser when appropriate, but take your time to understand what you are actually doing.
- To **edit files** or **open a terminal window**, we provide **VS Code Server**, basically the great VS Code Editor running in your browser.

TIP: Commands you are supposed to run can be shown with or without the expected output

TIP: The command line can wrap on the HTML page from time to time. Therefore the output might be separated from the command line for better readability by an empty line.

== Finding your way in the lab

If you're reading these lines, you should see a WebUI looking like the following screenshot.
We call this user interface "Showroom" so don't wonder if you see this name here and there.

.Showroom navigation overview
image::showroom.drawio.png[Showroom navigation overview]

The lab instructions are made of chapters, or exercises, which you should do in order, not forgetting steps as they might be relevant to following exercises.

You can jump back to a specific chapter using the list in the top left corner.
Each chapter has a title and a table of content, which might be located at the top of the instructions or as a separate menu to the right, depending on your browser width.

On the right side, there are different tabs each offering a different access to your environment, described in more details in the next chapter.
You may use the resizing handle in the middle to give more space to the environment or to the instructions.

TIP: if you don't see the right hand tabs in your environment, don't worry, you can also access the environment directly, as explained in the next chapter.

== Accessing your Lab Environment

As hinted in the previous chapter, you can access most elements of the environment through the showroom tabs.
If in doubt, check the xref:lab-access.adoc[Lab Access] section.

The following chapters explain in more details how to access the command line.

=== Using VS Code

Your main point of contact with the lab is **VS Code Server**, providing a VS Code-experience in your browser. You'll use VS Code to open terminals and to edit files (either in the build-in GUI editor or just using your favorite editor on the command line).

Now, open **VS Code** by clicking on the URL {z_vscode_web_ui_url}[window=_blank], or click on the "Codeserver" tab (which should be the default).

You should be greeted with a login screen:

image::vscode-pwd.png[500,300]

Use the password **{z_vscode_web_ui_password}** to log in to the **VS Code** server web UI. Now open a new terminal by heading to the menu item **Terminal** at the top of the **VS Code** UI and select **New Terminal** (the menu item might be hidden depending on browser width, behind three dots). A new section will appear in the lower half of the screen and you will be greeted with a prompt:

image::vscode-terminal.png[]

Congrats, you now have a shell terminal on your bastion node you can use to work on the command line. From here you run commands or access the other hosts in your lab environment, if the lab task requires it.

=== OPTIONAL: Direct Lab Access using SSH

You can of course use SSH directly to access the bastion node when you have an SSH client ready to go and know your way around:

[subs="attributes",source,shell,role=execute]
----
ssh {z_ssh_user}@{z_bastion_host_name}
----

The password is still the same: {z_ansible_controller_admin_password}

TIP: The user to access the terminal is `{z_ssh_user}`, but your bastion node is setup to let you become `root` using _sudo_ without a password.

TIP: All access information has been summarized for your convenience under xref:lab-access.adoc[Lab Access], accessible in the navigation menu to the right.

The "Terminal" tab gives you the same impression as SSH without the need to login, you're directly on the bastion host.

== Lab Configuration

Most prerequisite tasks have already been done for you:

- Ansible software is installed
- `sudo` has been configured on the managed hosts to run commands that require root privileges.
- An `.ansible-navigator.yml` configuration file has been created.
Without it, you would have to add parameters to each execution of `ansible-navigator`.

== Brief Introduction to `ansible-navigator`

During this lab, you will always use `ansible-navigator` which supersedes the capabilities of `ansible-playbook`. Let's check Ansible Navigator has been installed correctly (your browser might ask for permission for pasting):

[source,shell,role=execute]
----
ansible-navigator --version
----

where the result should be something like (your actual version might differ):
[source,shell]
----
ansible-navigator 3.4.1
----

Have now a look at your Ansible Navigator configuration file. It's a dot file in your user's home directory and can be printed to screen with the following command:

[source,shell,role=execute]
----
cat ~/.ansible-navigator.yml
----

You can also open the file in VS Code by using the navigation bar on the left or the "Open File" command from the "File" menu.

Note the following parameters within the `execution-environment` section:

- `image`: where the default execution environment is set, we have switched it to your **private automation hub**
- `pull.policy`: set to **missing**, only download the execution environment if it doesn't already exist locally.
- `environment-variables`: since execution environments are basically Linux containers, which don't have access to your environment variables, we have to compile a list of variables we want to have passed through to the container, or even specifically defined.

For a full listing of every configurable knob checkout the link:https://ansible.readthedocs.io/projects/navigator/settings/[settings documentation,window=_blank].

NOTE: For your convenience, we have pre-configured the authentication credentials for Ansible Automation Platform, so you won’t need to log in manually. However, in real-world scenarios, it's best to avoid this practice, as storing passwords in a plaintext configuration file can pose security risks.

Run the `ansible-navigator` command with the `images` argument to look at execution environments configured on the control node:

[source,shell,role=execute]
----
ansible-navigator images
----

image::navigator-images.png[]

NOTE: The output you see might differ from the above output, but you should see at least the one image configured in the file.

This command gives you information about all currently installed Execution Environments or EEs for short. Investigate an EE by pressing the corresponding number. For example pressing **0** with the above example will open the `ee-supported-rhel8` execution environment:

image::navigator-ee-menu.png[]

Selecting e.g. **0** for `Image information` will show information about the execution environment image you are inspecting:

image::navigator-ee-info.png[]

To get back to the preceding view in `ansible-navigator` press **Esc**, if needed several times.
The last press in the main menu will get you out of Navigator.
Alternatively you can type **:q** anywhere to exit at once (familiar with Vi?).
